[DIGITAL EFFECT]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Here in the Hidden
Valley of Flowers,
Jen continues to
ask more of Jeff,
for him to stand up for her
amidst all their family chaos
and violence.
And Elle, with her
angers and triggers
and self-righteousness,
has set the perfect table
for Ryan's power to rise.
That is, if he's willing to
take this experience for all
it has to offer.
Till there is conflict
within violence within,
all your spiritual
vocabulary is just hypocrisy.
And then we can use
as many fancy words,
but we deeply know
inside how we are within.
We often just get the concept
on the level of the mind
and then we repeat it.
Like, oh yeah, I am totality.
I understand it.
But if you really understood
it, you would not be the same.
You would alter absolutely
your whole life,
your way of being would alter.
What meaning you give
to things would alter.
The way you experience
would alter.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[MOTORCYCLE ENGINE]
It's not a journey
to feel better.
Do you understand?
You come here to transcend.
>> (SINGING) Yeah!
>> He said you
know, those people,
the people that were complaining
about the food were weak,
but me, because I sat
there, listened to it
and didn't express my opinions,
was just as weak or weaker.
Then he said, this is it,
this is your chance to evolve.
So I really took a lot of
that stuff away with me
and I'm already, I'm already
there, I'm already in my power.
I just, I take it
away from myself,
and it's something I'm
going to have to work at,
but that's my evolution.
>> This conversation
when we talk about,
talked about your
possessions having you,
the possessions
possessing you, huh?
Whether it is a piece of bread
or a bed sheet or whatever
it is, how quickly
we give our power.
And in life, it might be
something else, isn't it?
In your life, in your
story, something else.
And then the question
arises, are we really free?
And as the great master
Gurdjieff, you know, he said,
that one of the biggest
problems with humanity
is that they think they are
free while they're enslaved.
They create an
illusion in their mind
that they are free
while they walk around
enslaved by their own
small self waiting
to take up arms and
ammunition against self
and against each other.
So the opportunity
of us coming together
in such sincere intention is to
set ourselves free from self.
Because we are the ones who
are in our way every moment,
not the experience.
It's the experience
that is in the way.
And the self-righteous
part is always present
no matter who we are.
And when you begin to
really access the true self,
then you are purely
experiencing, purely,
untainted.
No story.
All the stories end.
All conflict ends.
So please, I request
you all as we are here,
and you've been so
great, so magnificent,
to take this opportunity
and access your own depths.
Be very aware of what you give
your attention to in your mind
and what you give life
to through your words.
We often underestimate
our own power.
Only when we begin to realize
how powerful we are and we take
absolute responsibility for it
and we are ready to step in it,
will there be peace.
Otherwise, there'll be no peace.
We'll be trying to
feed off each other.
You hear me?
>> I think when I'm
in my highest energy,
I inspire people.
And I think when I allow
myself to focus on petty,
you know, unimportant things,
that same power can really
pierce people in a way that
I'm not really too proud of,
and kind of hurt people.
And I'm not proud of that.
For him to say, you know,
you can affect people deeply,
it's like, OK, well, where
do you want to go with that?
How deep do I want to pierce
them and inspire them?
Or do I want to hurt them and
leave casualties along the way?
I don't want to do that.
So I got an apology to make.
>> See if you can allow
every person in the circle
and the three who are
not into your heart.
Realize where you are and how
in this very moment, behold.
It's expressing itself through
you without any effort.
Right now, you're alive,
connected, sustained,
supported effortlessly
right now.
See if you're can absolutely
surrender to the presence,
the great mystery.
>> What's going to
happen when we get home?
There's a lot of violence
and yelling and shouting
amongst themselves.
And the first thing
I thought of was
to try to come out, come home
to that from a place of love.
Like if they're being
violent towards me
and violent towards one
another with their words
or with their actions, if
I react to that with love,
how could they be violent back?
>> But I'm glad I stayed behind,
because Anand has a, we are
here to learn.
And so what he said today
really hit home again.
And it's good to try to
strengthen myself inside.
So with my family I
am leading by example.
My friends, lead by example.
You know, I freakin', I love
jokes, I don't like gossip.
You know, I'm just
like everybody else.
You look around and
you analyze the way
other people are, the
way they act and you
find humor in it I guess.
And sometimes it's
not all about that.
>> I did the Valley of Flowers
and I really don't know how I
did it.
You know, about 6 and 1/2
kilometers round trip.
I barely was hanging
on, especially when
it started raining.
>> Yeah, I could barely
keep up with you.
>> Oh, come on.
My legs must be stronger
than, than they've ever
been so far, since I had that
pinched nerve problem earlier
in the year.
They must be a lot stronger to
be able to do that round trip,
especially on that trail.
But I'm more interested in
the internal development now
and thinking a lot
about how it's going
to be when I get back to LA.
And we'll see.
>> (SINGING) The river is
flowing, flowing and rolling,
the river is flowing.
>> With one sacred
peak remaining,
Mario has been considering
not returning with the group
to Rishikesh where we started.
Going back to Rishikesh is an
important part of integration.
But Mario often gets pulled
off onto side adventures.
Even in the Valley
of the Flowers,
he wandered off and missed
Anand's very important talk.
>> I have lots of energy.
I put the energy out.
I get lots of energy.
Sometimes I don't know
exactly what to do
or how to focus it in
it and it burns up.
And I can start a lot of things.
I wanted to go
into Nepal, Tibet,
we were right on the borders.
It made sense.
But there's so much
beautiful things
right here in this part
of India in the Himalayas,
that I got to respect
what this has to give me.
So that was something
Anand said, hey,
stay focused, complete
your cycles, finish it
and things will be all right.
>> I'm going through sort
of a life change right now,
so it's not necessarily a fear.
Maybe some sort of an
ego, self-centeredness.
There's a lot of factors
playing in my life right now.
And you know, while you're
trekking and hiking up
in the Himalayas and you do
get to spend a lot of time
while you're
walking, you can walk
with people and talk
and chat, but you also
spend a lot of time by
yourself to contemplate.
And I think that's what a
lot of people are doing,
myself included.
Contemplating on really what
is my next step and where
do I want to go.
And I think being up in a
place like the Himalayas
kind of brings clarity.
>> (SINGING) The river is
flowing, flowing and rolling.
The river.
>> As a man, I think in the
world we live in, there's a lot
of pressure on men socially.
So it's important for men to
first come into their power
and not seek the who
am I through money.
Men have a deep insecurity
around money and sexuality.
Do you understand?
Sex, money, fame, power.
But money more so,
because money means power.
Power to provide,
power to take care.
Money means attention,
it's a self-worth thing,
do you understand?
So, we give a lot
of meaning to money.
So it's very important
for a man to first
really set himself free and
know himself independently
of the money, of his self-worth,
what he is really made of.
Absolutely, absolute certainty.
Feel very certain in it.
And then one has to stop
looking at money as money.
That's an art.
Until you stop looking
at money as money,
you will always be poor.
No matter how much you
have, you will always
have issues with it.
So even when you think about
your career, you don't think,
how will I make money?
You think about how am I
going to support people?
How am i going to help people?
How am I going to
make people feel?
What am I going to
create, which is going
to create something of value?
Something which is
going to touch people.
And the money starts to flow.
The moment you start
thinking on the money level,
you have given up your power.
You succumb to a
man made entity.
>> When speaking about
money and prosperity,
Anand went on to tell us
about his father who came
to Rishikesh where Anand was
born over 40 years ago with
just $0.25 to his name.
This is before the
Beatles ever came there,
before it was on the global map.
Just a small jungle town where
his father built up photography
to a jewelry business.
But it was this business
and his life's work
that he almost lost.
>> And you know, so I was
telling this story about
my father.
So he once got an order,
I think this was about,
more than a decade
ago, I was very young.
And the biggest
order of his life,
once he had started
the jewelry design,
jewelry business for a few
thousand dollars, you know.
It was big money for that time.
Around $50,00, $60,000,
something, you know.
And then he would sell it.
So it was a lot of money
at that time in India.
And in a small village
like Lakshman Jhula.
So he went and bought
this big order,
he bought all the
gems and everything.
He found the best gems and
everything, massive amount
of emeralds.
He had the buyer ready who
was going to pay for it.
Who was going to buy.
He was coming back from
where he bought it,
he stopped at a temple.
A Goddess, Divine Mother temple.
He had, you know in
jewelry business,
gems are small things, this can
be millions of dollars, rights?
So he went into the
temple, he came out,
he had the bag on
him, everything gone.
From inside the temple.
All of it, gone.
So whatever he had built till
that time was gone in a moment.
I remember him coming
back from there.
So yeah, you know, my mom,
they were sitting there.
So she asked him,
how was the trip?
He said, yeah, it was great.
I loved the journey.
I went to these places, I got
the best gems and everything
and then I sat in
the taxi cab and I
went to the beautiful temple.
Oh, yeah, and then at the
temple, I lost my stuff.
So that was not the
first thing he told her.
>> Yeah.
And he said, you know,
I remember still,
he said very clearly, he said,
you know when it came to me,
I was very happy.
When it's taken from me
why should I be unhappy?
It was never mine to begin with.
If I need it, I'll get it.
And if I don't, I'll
get something else.
I will get whatever I need,
I have no doubt about it.
And his business grew
exponentially after that.
He started from scratch again.
And I think he did
a pretty good job,
and never compromised
on principles.
So never.
I've never seen him compromise
on principles, very clearly.
>> (SINGING) Now, it
shall, it shall be.
>> Today we hike up to the last
sacred peak, Hemkund Sahib.
We start at 11,400 feet and go
to 15,000 feet of elevation.
It's nearly a vertical
hike, and the oxygen levels
make it harder and
harder to breathe.
>> When we went up to the
Valley of the Flowers,
just felt really cleansed
and really refreshed.
And it's kind of funny, because
I really resisted doing it.
Do I really want to
go to the Sikh temple?
I'm sure and everybody
kept amplifying
that it was going to be
harder than Kedarnath,
and I was like, well, I
don't want to do that.
I don't feel like
I'm in that space.
>> (SINGING)
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Early on in the hike, Jen
is having a lot of difficulties
with the altitude and the
lack of oxygen. Jeff, however,
is being more
helpful than before.
He seems continually
inspired by Anand's wisdom.
So much so, that he starts
making his own inquiries
into the nature of his
ego, and perhaps his
and human nature's
propensity for violence.
>> Being a million, the
population came down to two
or three million of just me and
some women that had the same
ideas.
I suppose there would
be years of peace.
But then eventually, I'm
sure the ego would come out,
the individual needs would come
out, and we would go to battle,
even though we look the
same, we believe the same,
we want the same, I suppose.
We would still end up fighting.
So somewhere in human nature
it's that ego, I guess,
that leads to destruction.
So maybe here I can do
something about me personally.
>> Well, the reality is, I've
got a pretty good cold right
now and we basically reached
the climax of our physical
challenge today, going up
our most challenging hike.
But I was absolutely going
to persist through it
in terms of hiking up
it and hiking down it,
despite my sickness.
And I'd say being in this
environment definitely assists
in a mindset, if
you will, that there
are some techniques,
some processes,
some mindsets that
can help you persevere
through those challenges,
despite the illness,
and to conquer them.
And so, yeah, those are very
valuable kinds of tools for us
to have that we carry with
us beyond this journey too,
in all walks of our life.
>> En route to Hemkund Sahib,
the mantra that Anand gave us,
and that many of the Sikhs
around us are chanting,
is waheguru.
Waheguru is a celebration of the
guru within, the power within.
[CHIMING]
>> Waheguru, the guru
inside, the warrior inside.
Waheguru has taught me for
so long and brought me here.
Waheguru inside
and all the people
that have chosen to be here.
I think the wise guru inside
has all made the choice,
and then the mind has just
caught up this whole trip.
We're halfway through the hike.
Here we go.
>> (SINGING)
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Start going up the
mountain and I felt so easy,
like I was just kind
of gliding through.
And all I had in my head was
the Sikh chant, Satnam Waheguru.
And I just kept saying
it over and over,
and then I'd have a
voice interject saying,
walk with purpose.
And then I'd go
back to the chant.
And then it was like,
walk with purpose.
You know, I stopped to look at
the view at the midway camp.
Some of the Sikhs were
like, come have chai.
Another one was saying, come
on, come with me, come on.
It was just very
inviting and very easy.
And it just didn't faze me.
>> And we'd literally climb
the whole mountain with them
chanting nonstop around us.
And their singing
just kind of, it
was like we're almost floating.
You know, the tone, and it
was just the same mantra
over and over again, and
whatever they were saying
was the strongest sound current.
And it felt that way.
So even though it
was the hardest,
it felt like it was the easiest,
because we were actually
in the company of Sikhs,
of people who are really
taking a pilgrimage, because
it was the end of the season.
So it was fabulous.
I loved it.
My favorite one by far.
The temple, the
communion with the food.
It was just giant, giant pots,
like huge vats, metal of chai,
and then like a soup
that was like porridge
and a curry soup mixed together.
And it was free.
And it was interesting,
because it wasn't cooked
in like the best environment.
It probably was
one of the, coming
from an American standpoint,
one of the less hygienic places
to cook food.
I think it was a garage.
I don't even think that was
like a kitchen, you know.
But the love and
the fellowship just,
it just made everything
more flavorful, you know,
it really did.
>> So this is the place
which signifies that a life
of purpose.
Purpose to evolve,
purpose to serve others.
Just not about me.
Which has been a big
teaching for these people.
Most of the challenges that
faced is when they have been,
and what about me?
Oh, I don't like
this, oh, you know.
So this last journey
last week is service.
A life of purpose,
a life of greater
meaning than the little I.
What does their life stand for?
What is your legacy?
What are you adding
to the collective,
to the unified field by the way
you be, by the way you live,
by the way you think,
what do you believe in?
What are you willing
to surrender?
to stand up for?
So I think those are
important questions.
A lot of time, we
lose this question
and we are caught
up in petty things.
A life of purpose is important.
A free man is always a
warrior, but a warrior
who stands up for principle,
stands up for life,
for compassion, for service,
for life beyond little I,
for light beyond, what about me.
To a warrior, power
is an authentic power.
Power which is nothing
over the other.
It is connection.
It is realizing that you are
the whole and the whole is you.
There's nothing more powerful
than that realization.
So a warrior walks free,
lives free, and serves.
Lives radically.
A warrior would never
be, the yogic warrior
would not be contained
within the society's norms.
And there will always
be a little bit
of madness in the warrior.
Can't be too sane.
As Krishnamurti said,
to be well adjusted
to a profoundly sick society
is no measure of health.
So a warrior is living in
the world, but not of it.
>> As we all gather here at
this frigid glacial lake,
we'll have the opportunity
to dip our little I,
the individual I into the
frigid waters and connect with
the unity, the power and
the source of these great
mountains.
>> But when we talk
about masculine power,
it is to stand up
for principles.
Not dogma or fanaticism,
but principles of evolution,
principles are something
which are beyond the, what
about me syndrome.
To stand up.
And also, absolutely
be ready to surrender,
because that's powerful too.
To be ready to surrender
when it's needed, absolutely.
A strong spine and a soft heart.
>> (SINGING) I'm coming home.
I'm coming home.
I'm coming home
straight to my heart.
I'm coming home.
>> I saw him go under a couple
of times and I was really
starting to panic.
>> Pretty, pretty bad blowout.
I mean, it was
one of those bang!
>> That's what this
trip's all about.
You drop into the thick and
you go about everything.
>> (SINGING) I'm coming home.
I'm coming home.
I'm coming home to the
place of unity in my heart,
where all beings are free,
where a desert thirst
is quenched with forgiveness,
our differences be our money.
No vacancy for.